Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Richard Lobs. And today I'm
Jen by Doctor Paul Fert. He is distinguished Professor
Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of Waterloo. And
today we're talking about his latest book, Falsehoods Fly.
Why Misinformation Spreads and How to stop it. So,
Doctor FEG, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Uh Thank you very much for having me.
So we're going to talk a lot about misinformation
here today. But I guess that before we get
into misinformation itself, it would be important for people
to understand a little bit better what we're talking
about when we talk about information itself. So what
do you think? I it's are the most important
aspects of information that people should know to then
uh have a better understanding of what misinformation is?
Yeah, that's exactly the right place to start because
you can't have account of misinformation or disinformation unless
you have an account of what information is. That's
a surprisingly hard problem. There's an old mathematical field
called information theory that was developed by telecommunication scientists
to describe signals going through. But it's not useful
for our purposes, our purposes are to figure out
what's information for people, not just sort of abstract
probabilities, we need to have something that can be
true or false. So how does it go? Well,
one key word to go into it is representation.
A representation is something that stands for something in
the world. So when you get a representation, it
could be a sentence or it could be a
picture or it could be uh a song. These
are all things that can stand for things in
the world. So that's what a representation is. So
information should be meaningful, it should be representational should
stand for stuff. And now of course, if you
can do that, if it can represent the world,
it can also misrepresent the world. And that's where
you get misinformation, you end up with something that's
false. So if something can be true or false
of the world or accurate or useful, those are
all things that go under the head of, of
of good information of real information, then you've got
something that can really make a difference in human
communication.
But how exactly do we go about distinguishing information
from misinformation? I guess that's a very important question
to tackle here because many times if people make
claims, usually based on conspiracy theories about how what
the experts, the media, the classifier as misinformation, it's
just what some people, some elite out there uh
establishes as misinformation or decides is information or misinformation,
right? So how do we do it properly?
OK. The key question then is what's the difference
between information that's real and information, which is misinformation,
which is one of three things here. I actually
got this from the US surgeon general who gave
a good account of it. Uh The surgeon general
in the US, the top health official is really
worried because he knows that there's vast amounts of
misinformation about health out there thinking about COVID about
vaccines and constant other things. But he came up
with a nice one. He said, misinformation is information
which is false, inaccurate or misleading. Um So the
key question there is accuracy, does it actually reflect
what goes on in the world? So my, my
account of information is correctly representing what's in the
world. Assume there's a world, this is already something
that people disagree about. But I think there's lots
of reasons to believe. Yes, there is a real
world out there and we can either get it
right or get it wrong information that's done properly.
Real information gets it right. Misinformation gets it wrong.
It can be because it's got sentences that are
false or pictures that are, are inaccurate or just
things that are misleading because they're a little bit
off and they give the wrong sense of what,
what's important. So, misinformation is information which is false,
inaccurate or misleading or often all three and we
find loads of it uh in all the different
fields that I talk about in my book, you
find it in medical domains, you find in science,
you find lots of it in politics, uh lots
of it in arguments about um equality. And the
example that I used to sum it all up
about is in the Ukraine war where the Russians
in particular use a lot of propaganda to tell
lies about Ukraine to try to justify it. So
real information about the Ukraine War is what actually
happened, who attacked who, what kinds of governments do
the different places have? That's real information because it
corresponds to reality. But when Vladimir Putin says that
their, their invasion is justified because the Ukrainian government
is run by Nazis. Well, that's false and it's
inaccurate and it's extremely misleading because it's being used
to justify an invasion for which there is no
justification.
And why should we worry about misinformation? Exactly. Because
for example, I've already talked with people on my
show who have been doing work on misinformation, how
it spreads on the internet, for example. And uh
over the course of almost all of those interviews,
people have told me, for example, that it's usually
just a small minority of people basically putting information
out on the internet and spreading it. And most
people do not fall for misinformation and even the
ones who fall for it, we have probably to
look a little bit into their political and social
affiliations to understand why they, uh, I mean, tend
to believe in specific kinds of misinformation and so
on. So, uh I, I mean, there, there are
arguments, I guess for saying that uh perhaps sometimes
we exaggerate a little bit the social impact, the
political and social impact of misinformation. But, uh I
mean, why should we worry about it? Exactly.
Well, I don't know where the people were saying
this but they're obviously not aware of what's happening
in the United States right now. There's a high
probability that the next president of the United States
is going to be Donald Trump who is a
massive purveyor of misinformation. So he's still saying that
Biden stole the last election. He's still saying that
the economy is doing horrible. He's saying everything is
Biden's fault and that he was perfect leader. So
there's massive amounts of misinformation and everything he says.
Uh WELL, even while he was president, one of
the presses, I think it was the Washington Post
tracked his statements and they found 15,000 lies and
these lies are enabling him to take control of
the world's most powerful country. Now, maybe he'll get
beaten and that would be good. But right now
he's leading in the polls and he's definitely going
to be the Republican candidate. So anyone who thinks
that misinformation is a problem is not a problem,
hasn't been paying attention to that or consider health
right now. Measles is spreading in Europe and in
Canada Canada hasn't had cases of measles for decades
because there is general vaccination starting in the sixties.
But because of misinformation about vaccines in general and
about the measles vaccine in particular, people are starting
to get sick again. There are still people dying
of COVID despite the fact that there are excellent
uh vaccines available. So the problem, the reason we
have to worry about misinformation is that people get
harmed, severely harmed by having fascist leaders in power
or by having diseases spread when they don't need
to when there are good medical treatments available. So,
misinformation is just very, very, very harmful. Uh EVEN
most recent uh I mean, Putin is still justifying
his invasion of the Ukraine. What's the harm there?
Well, 30,000 Ukrainian soldiers, countless Ukrainian civilians have been
killed as a result of this invasion, which he
justifies by layers of misinformation. Not only the claim
that Ukraine is run by Nazis, but also of
false historical theories about Ukraine is really part of
Russia. And so these false beliefs, this misinformation is
justifying the causation of immense amounts of harm to
human beings. So it's not just the fact that
there's a bunch of people talking nonsense on tiktok,
I mean that that's not so important unless, but
when they start saying what are the causes of
diseases, what's the political way to deal with the
current problems in society? Then misinformation is causing real
harms. And that's why the first sense of my
book is Misinformation Kills. And it clearly does. Uh
I give also examples from climate change. There are
already people who died because of climate change because
of heatwaves and wildfires and things like that. And
all the information, the real information that we get
from government bodies is that this problem is going
to get worse and worse and worse that there
were a few million people died from the COVID
um epidemic, but it's going to be many more
million people are gonna die as climate change gets
worse. Uh IN accord with the best scientific information.
So it's not just that there's these little harms
and these little unfortunate things that happen because people
gossip on Twitter or tiktok or Instagram, people die
as a result of misinformation.
So let's get now a little bit into before
we get into some of the examples you mentioned
there and explore them a little bit more like
the Ukraine War, scientific misinformation, medical misinformation and so
on. In the book, you bring into the book,
a particular framework that you call the A theory
of information and misinformation or the A I MS
because it stands for acquisition, influence memory and spread.
Uh Could you tell us a little bit about
these for general processes? What do they correspond to
how and how they work?
Sure, it was about five years ago, I realized
I needed a theory of information. It was because
of another project. I was doing about energy and
the philosophy of mind. But I kept running across
information. And so I went to look and see
what are the current theories of information. And there's
still the old theory that I mentioned coming out
of telecommunications theory uh is around. But there wasn't
a good theory that would actually cover information here.
My background in philosophy of science was relevant along
with other philosophies of science. I've been arguing that
scientific theories by and large, at least a lot
of the most important ones are descriptions of mechanisms.
So if you want to explain how the body
works, how life works, you look for mechanisms, you've
got the heart and the veins for as part
of the uh cardiovascular system, you've got the breathing
system, you've got cell division. So you can explain
all of life by having a bunch of mechanisms
in mind. So what's a mechanism? Well, if you
know what a bicycle is, you've got a good
example because with a bicycle, you've got the different
parts, you've got the handlebars and the frame and
the wheels and the crank and all those things.
So if you want to explain how a bicycle
works, it's the same as how you explain how
the body works, you identify mechanisms. So the question
I asked myself, what are the mechanisms of information
as far as I know? No one's ever asked
that question because they were just sort of using
it informally as a kind of story or they
were relying on Claude Shannon's old uh mathematical definition.
But this turned out to be really interesting because
I started to think about what makes information work
in the real world and these high level problems
that deal that matter to human beings. And I
came up with a total of eight mechanisms that
fit very nicely under these four headings because it
too hard to remember at once. So I boil
it down to A I MS. So A is
acquisition. So acquisition is not just what you get
from other people like. That's what I mean called
mean by spread. It's acquisition from the world. So
how do we acquire information from the world? And
that divides into two parts collecting and representing. So
how do we collect information from the world? Well,
for a start, we use our senses, we use
our eyes and our ears and our touch and
so on or smell. And so that's collecting, which
is the key part of acquisition. So that's the
way to do it, right? And obviously, we know
how to do it better now than people did
100,000 years ago. Because we not only use observation,
we've also developed great techniques in science to do
systematic observations with lots of people to use instruments.
Instruments are wonderful because you can measure things, you
use telescopes, microscopes, rulers, x ray machines. So we've
got all these instruments and one of the most
important things that we've learned how to acquire information
is experiments. You don't just observe, you change the
world and see what happens. You do a manipulation.
So he said, well, if I change this a
little bit, what's gonna happen and that's really great
because that gets us causal information. So acquisition is
really the first part of getting real information if
you do it right. Unfortunately, we often don't do
it right. The opposite of, of this kind of
acquisition, sometimes it could be sloppy experiments. But what
it is in a lot of cases of what
I talked about, including people like Vladimir Putin and
Donald Trump, it's making stuff up and people don't
understand the difference between observing the world experimenting on
it, using instruments, on the one hand that actually
works and making stuff up, which doesn't work at
all. I mean, because that can be whatever you
want to believe. So that's the acquisition part. The
second part is inference because you want to just
rely on what you observe, you want to make
inferences and go beyond that. We want scientific theories,
we want to know the causes of stuff. And
science again has, and philosophy have found really good
ways to do this. We can make inference to
theories that are the best explanations of the evidence.
That's great. It's not always guaranteed. Sometimes we get
it wrong, but that's just a terrific way of
going. Well, what goes on with misinformation, it's very
different. It's not this kind of inference to the
best explanation of the best theory. It's very often
there's a bunch of things that go wrong. But
the most, the often thing that goes awful thing
that goes wrong is called motivated reasoning. This is
an idea that psychologists have developed that. It covers
cases where you believe something, not because you have
evidence for it, but because you want it to
be true. Uh And we all do this and
you don't have to be the, the, the awful
leaders I mentioned to do this. We all do
it. We all have things that we want to
believe. We all want to believe that we're healthy
and we're going to be successful and our, and
our, and our Children are great and we've got
all these beliefs that we want to believe, well,
they may have evidence for them. But if we
just do it on the basis of motivated reasoning,
we can get into real trouble because that just
becomes a very sophisticated kind of wishful thinking. And
so most of the views that you find in
conspiracy theories in this, he lies about science and
medicine and these political lies. They're just, it's just
motivated reasoning. People believe it not because there's any
evidence for it, but because they want to believe
it because it fits with their desires for power
or financial gain. Uh So that's, that's the difference
at the inference part. OK. So that's two, that's
acquisition and inference. The next one is memory. Memory
is really important because we can't just make things
up all along. We just can't keep rediscovering things.
We need to remember what we learned. And so
human memory is quite powerful and so we store
the things that are important to us, but memory
is fallible and we can do something that's called
motivated memory. And so instead of memory, we're learning
what's actually true of the world, we can actually
just sort of again make it up. And so
it goes into our memory, not because it's warranted,
but because it's um it just suits our goals.
Uh The fourth is spread, uh spread is what
happens in between people. So most of what we
learn, we learn not from directly interacting with the
world, it comes from other people could come from
the media, come from social media, come from talking
to other people and media can be incredibly important.
If you get it, your information from reliable sources.
I have a set of TV, uh news shows
and, and newspapers that I trust because I know
they've got a good track record. But where do
people get their spread of information today? Increasingly, it's
from social media. I was shocked the other day
to read that uh lots of young people, people
in their teens and early twenties get their news
from tiktok. Tik Tok is an astonishingly unreliable uh
source of information because anybody can do it. They
create these little catchy videos and it's not curated
at all. The people who own tiktok don't care
about truth, they just care about highballs, they want
people to be engaged because then they can sell
ads. And that's true also for Instagram and Twitter
now called X. Um And so the social media
and it's true for Facebook. So this was actually
a drastic change in the spread of information. It
started only about 20 years ago when these became
available because there used to be at least some
kind of gatekeeping that went on at the mostly
respectable newspapers and television programs because they thought they
had an obligation, a journalistic obligation to tell the
truth. And so they would screen information. But with
social media, somebody has a crazy idea and boom,
they can get it out to millions of other
people. And this actually has been the single busy
uh biggest cause for the dramatic increase of misinformation
that's available. It's because social media has changed spread.
That's my fourth category of of mechanism, social spread
from something where there's at least some constraints on
it to totally unconstrained where people who are working
just with making stuff up and motivated reasoning and
biased memories can then send it out to not
just thousands of other people but literally millions of
other people. So that's why we've got this huge
amounts of misinformation about political conspiracies and vaccines and
and so on. Uh So that's why spread is
the real the fourth one. So we need acquisition
uh inference memory and spread and when those things
are done, right? And in some areas they are
done right by responsible journalists or by or by
scientific research. Well, that's great. We get real information
but when they're done badly as they are are
increasingly today, then we get misinformation.
And what can we do exactly with this framework?
If I understand it correctly, we can both understand
how each specific type of misinformation. Like for example,
scientific misinformation, political misinformation works. Looking back at different
kinds of misinformation out there. Uh AND how each
of these different processes played out and understand how
that particular kind of misinformation spread over time. But
we can also use it to tackle each specific
kind of misinformation and try to uh counter it.
OK. Let, let me give you an analogy. I
think there's an analogy between this problem which is
huge and what goes on in medicine. So what's
good health, good health basic basically means that all
the mechanisms in your body are working. What's disease,
disease is when they break down your heart stops
beating, or your cells start dividing and become cancer.
And so good health is the mechanisms are working.
Disease is when the mechanisms break down. But of
course, we have medicine. What does medicine do? It
has cures well, how does it do that? It
intervenes with the mechanisms to make things work. It
fixes your heart or it fixes your lungs or
it stops the cell division. So what we need
for misinformation is something that's analogous. We need something
that's like a cure to fix the broken mechanisms.
And what I do is I in the book
is identify a whole set of these, not ones
that I've invented myself, but I compiled them and
formulated them and fit in a way that fits
with the mechanism account. So I can give you
a bunch of different examples. Well, the first one
is have a willingness to identify the difference between
truth and falsity. When uh Rudy Giuliani was defending
Donald Trump. He said, well, truth is not truth.
First of all, if you throw truth out, if
you don't think there's a reality that you're trying
to get right? Uh THEN you're in big problems.
But the first thing is to recognize that yes,
there's a world out there for medicine and for
science and for politics and we're trying to get
it right. And you have to be aware then
that people are often saying things that are false.
So you have to have falsehood detectors going. You
also have a way of scrutinizing your sources, who's
saying it? Do they have good sources? So anything
that Donald Trump says is likely to be false
because he just says whatever he wants to suit
his own needs. On the other hand, there are
some good sources like the newspapers or the TV
sources that I mentioned. Um But then for deeper
purposes, there's other things we can bring in. For
many years. I taught critical thinking. Critical thinking is
a process where first of all, you identify the
thinking errors that people are making things like motivated
reasoning, which everyone succumbs to. But then you try
to counter that with good ways of reasoning such
as evaluating theories based on the evidence. So, critical
thinking is this two steps. First of all, what
errors are people making in their thinking? And secondly,
how can we fix it? Another way of doing
this that other people have thought up in a
quite different role that I that I just became
to appreciate is called motivational interviewing. It actually makes
belief change less like critical thinking and more like
therapy. Uh This was invented originally for people who
were being helped with addiction. So if somebody is
addicted to alcohol or to or to heroin or
to some other drug, it's hard to give just
reason with them because they've got an addiction. Uh
BUT motivational interviewing was invented as a sort of
therapeutic way of actually trying to understand people have
empathy with them, understand what's going on. Well, why
are you drinking so much or why is heroin
so important to you? And it actually has been
found to be effective. It's, it's sort of, it's
much nicer than critical thinking which sounds kind of
like cold hearted logic. This is being empathic and
understanding and helping. And actually one of the most
interesting applications is it works with people who are
vaccine deniers, people who don't want to vaccinate their
Children. Uh And so trying to give the pure
scientific argument doesn't work. But if you can talk
to these people, a lot of the people who
are vaccine deniers are actually really nice people, Their
parents are just caring about their Children. Uh And
they want to do what's best for the Children.
Unfortunately, through social media or, or lying politicians, they've
gotten misinformation. But if you empathize with them and
understand their worries about their Children, how they want
to do the best thing you can gradually nudge
them over. So they realize that vaccines is worthwhile.
So that's a technique called motivational interviewing. So there's
a whole battery of, of things many of which
have been tested out by psychologists that can help
you do this. Uh I made up the word
preform information by analogy to preventive medicine. So in
medicine, it's well known that it's hard to cure
people once they've got a disease. But if you
can prevent the disease, that's really great. So curing
cancer is hard but preventing cancer by making sure
people don't smoke or live in bad environments or
eat rotten food and that, that's much more effective.
So I made up the term preform information to
cover a whole set of ideas that psychologists have
introduced, that are ways of keeping people from getting
bad information in the first place. Uh One of
them is called uh pre bunking. So, debunking is
correcting misinformation. Pre bunking means get in there and
make sure people don't get it in the first
place. And so I think that's a really nice
technique that psychologists have, have invented. Another one they
call is inoculation. So you try to warn people,
uh it's not working with respect to Donald Trump
if, if, especially if he's gonna be the next
president, but there are millions and millions of people
who haven't been warned that you can't believe what
he says because he's just concerned with his own
power and his own fortune. But that's the kind
of pre bunking or inoculation that might operate in
some cases to help people to get taken in.
So there's a whole set of different ways in
which we can try to correct misinformation or even
more effectively in some cases, prevent it from arising
in the first place. So that's why this isn't
hopeless. It's not just, oh my God, we can
throw up our hands and realize there's just so
much misinformation that it can't work well. No, there
are some things we can do.
So you use the term cognitive error at a
certain point there, what counts as a cognitive error.
And also in the book, at a certain point,
you distinguish between psychological and social mechanisms be that
drive cognitive error. So what is the distinction and
why is it important to establish the distinction?
OK. So a cognitive error is a pattern of
thinking that leads to falsehoods. And here we can
really draw on in the case of psychology, decades
of research in the case of philosophy, hundreds of
years of research really going back to Aristotle. So
psychologist, psychologists call these biases cognitive biases. There's a
large literature that began with Conon Tasy and it's
really well documented mistakes that people commonly make in
their inferences. So there's these biases, but even older
is a tradition in philosophy called fallacies. And so
we know that there are patterns of reasoning. But
going back to Aristotle, people realize no, they're all
fallacies that people make all the time. And so
there are lists of literally hundreds of these, maybe
probably 50 biases, 50 fallacies and they're all well
understood. So our cognitive error come from these fallacies.
Let me just give you one philosophical example. Um
Post Hawk, Ergo hater, Ergo Proctor Hawk is the
Latin for after this. Therefore, because of this, sometimes
one thing happens and another big thing happens and
people think they're causally related, well, sometimes they are,
but often they're not, that's a mistake that people
naturally make. So psychology and philosophy have documented people's
tendency to fall into these kinds of errors which
are kinds of thinking that leads to mistakes. You
might wonder. Well, how could people be prone to
this when we're managing to survive in the world?
Well, surviving in the world doesn't take that much
thinking. You have to be able to survive and
reproduce and it really doesn't take that sophisticated thinking
just to survive and reproduce. But now we're really
leaving this rich, complicated world and having to deal
with complicated situations and the cognitive errors really tend
to draw us in uh that list from cognitive
biases and, and you and fallacies, philosophical fallacies misses
out on what I've already mentioned. What I think
is the most important one which is motivated reasoning.
This is where people believe something because it suits
their goals, it makes them happy, it's not just
wishful thinking, it means you there's something you want
and so you find reasons for it. So this
research was done by uh initially by a psychologist
named Ziva Kunda who actually was my late wife
and which is brilliant work. It's been cited out
10,000 times and the citation rate even though this
work was done 30 years ago is is just
zooming 1000 times in the last year or so
because people realize that this is the basis. So
you have to realize that everybody is prone to
motivated reasoning thinking, they're healthier than they are or
prone to be richer than they are. And so
I think that belongs as one of the, the,
the thinking errors that we have to watch out
for, uh, your other part of your question was
about social errors. Um Now the social error part
connects up with the fact that most of the
information, as I said, we get from other people.
That's the spread part. And the problem here is
you have to worry about who you trust. Uh,
YOU shouldn't trust anybody on Tik Tok because they're
not screened any, any, any 16 year old can
set up a Tik Tok account and declare themselves
a new source and who knows where they get
their news. So tiktok's utterly, uh, unreliable source and
that's gonna be true for a lot of other
social media. On the other hand, I've got a
list of newspapers that I think are really pretty
good, uh, and, uh, not perfect but really pretty
good in a number of TV programs TV, news
shows like the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, uh, that I,
I think is, they're usually right. There are people
certainly who really care about getting things right. They're
not just caring about pushing a particular political agenda.
Whereas you have other news sources in the US.
You've got Fox News, you can't believe anything on
Fox News. They're just pushing their Pro Trump agenda
and, and so they're as bad as social media
or, or religious texts. So you've got to be
able to distinguish these ways and figure out who
you can trust. So I've got a bunch of
people who I know have, are well informed, care
about the truth. If they tell me something, I'm
gonna believe it most of the time because they're,
I think they're reliable sources. So that's the social
part, the social part is acquire your information from
sources, you know, to be reliable rather than from
ones, you've got good reason to believe are highly
unreliable.
And by the way, since you, you mentioned new
sources there, how do we go about establishing the
credibility of different news sources? What, uh, factors do
we look into? Exactly?
That's really good question. It, it takes a lot
of time. Actually, you've got to follow these sources
for a while. Occasionally I'll encounter a new news
source and, uh, I wonder, are they reliable? So
when I was doing the research, for example, on
the, uh, um, conspiracies and, and the Russia Ukraine,
suddenly I was running across news sources like Russia
dot TV. Uh, AND, uh, well, first of all
I knew that Russia was unreliable and so I
had a hunch that Russia dot TV. But then
I looked at some of their content and you
could see they're just making things up that are,
that are announced by the Russian government. So it's
probably by association with good or bad people, but
sometimes you just have to follow it for a
long time. So I've got some of these newspaper
sources. One of my favorites is the British newspaper
called The Guardian that I've been reading for many,
many years and occasionally they do things that I
think are not quite right, but by and large,
I've been tracking what they say, what I get
from other sources that I think are reliable. And
uh so you, you have to track places for,
for a long period of time and see the
extent to which they turn out to be right
or turn out to be wrong.
So just before we dive into some of the
examples of misinformation where you explore in the book,
we illustrate all of what we've been talking about
here. Just tell us a little bit more about
a motivated reasoning because uh I would like to
understand here what's behind it, what drives motivated reasoning,
cognitively, emotionally and otherwise. Yeah,
that's a, that's a really deep question because people
used to think that the brain was sort of
divided up neatly that you've got intelligence on the
one hand and emotion on the other part. And
you should be able to distinguish that it goes
back to Plato. He said we should ana analyze
the human as being like you've got a um
a charier and uh three horses and you got
to kind of keep them under control and keep
cognition and emotion. So, but, but, but that now,
now that we have neuroscience, we know this isn't
right at all. If you look at the brain,
you've got cognitive areas and emotional areas, but they're
intensely interconnected. So our intelligence isn't just our raw
cognitive thinking ability. That's, that's an old view that
doesn't hold up now. But it's, in fact, depends
on a really sophisticated interaction between cognition and motion
between our, our cortex and our, our limbic system,
which concludes areas like the Amygdala. And the emotion
is actually really important because emotions tell us what's
important. It's not just a question of what's true,
it's what's important, what's gonna enable us to survive
and operate in the world. And so the view
of, of thinking, I get this mostly from Antonio
Damasio, but there's loads of subsequent support for. It
depends on this really tight interaction between our cognitions
and our emotions. The problem is there's no firewall,
there's no sharp division between cognition and emotion or
to put it in the terms that economic economists
might know, there's no sharp division between probabilities and
utilities. These things should be completely separate, but they're
not, they're all interactive in our brain. And often
this does it well because we're figuring out what's
in the world and we're figuring out what we
need to do. We have to avoid predators, we
have to find food. And so our emotions and
cognitions work well together, but they interact constantly and
sometimes this gets us into trouble. So it gets
into trouble where instead of our cognitions, depending on
how we're observing the world and what getting good
information sources, it gets tied in with our emotions.
And so you think? Oh, I know what I
want. So to take an extreme example. This happened
to a friend of mine, uh, he discovered a,
a lump in his armpit. Oh, that's nothing. I'm
young. I'm healthy. This can't possibly be a problem.
Well, a year later it finally got bad enough
that he got it checked out and turned out
to be Melanoma, which obviously is serious. But all
of us have a tendency to be somewhat uh
uh at least, at least I do and lots
of other people do think, oh, that's nothing. That
little bump is nothing. But that's a motivated reason
because that's what you want to believe. Uh So
this is something that happens because our cognitions and
our emotions are basically all tied together in the
brain. So uh that's uh that's, that's so that's
why it's such a serious problem and it means
that people who not only do it themselves but
realize that they can manipulate other people can do
the same thing. So Donald Trump is always tying
into people's emotions. He's getting people afraid of immigrants
uh concerned about their cost of living, afraid of
the so called the liberal elites who he claims
are running their lives. And so he's just absolutely
uh fiendish about manipulating people's emotions tapping into something
which is part of all of our thinking because
our cognitions and our emotions are so tightly interconnected.
So that's why motivated reasoning is so natural to
all of us because we don't have cognition in
one part of our brain and emotion in the
other. They're all interconnected with lots of going back
and forth. And so we all can be misled
into motivated reasoning as opposed to considering the evidence
that's important if we really care about our health
or about our political well being.
So in your book, you go through different kinds
of misinformation and the first one you tackle is
medical misinformation and a concrete example. And a very
recent example of that is the COVID-19 pandemic. So
in what ways does the framework we we talked
about before the A S or the A A
I MS framework apply here? Exactly.
Yeah, I think it provides a good account both
of why there's so much terrific real information about
COVID-19 and other diseases and also why there's so
much misinformation. So let's do real information first. Uh
I think that COVID-19 is one of the great
medical success stories. If you think of the fact
that the disease only showed up about a little
over four years ago and almost immediately the cause
was discovered, they found the virus and then within
a year, they found a vaccine that could uh
really diminish a lot. People either getting the disease
or the severity of the disease. Uh JUST a
fabulous success. So the amounts of real information that
came about from observation and experiment and theorizing is
just fabulous. So that's a great success story of
real information coming up in COVID-19 and there's lots
of other diseases for which we've done that as
well. But what got me interested in misinformation actually
in the first place is that four years ago,
at the same time as these wonderful advances were
being made, the amount of garbage being spread about.
It was just enormous. People were making up possible
cures. They were saying, oh, we can just use
bleach. That's one that Donald Trump did on television
or uh they came up with different theories about
the causation. Also, this was just created in a
in a uh uh Chinese lab. Well, it might
have been, but other people said it was no,
it was created an American lab. And other people
said no, the causes are actually um cell phone
towers. And so people generated all sorts of just
completely Bonkers theories about the origin as well as
all sorts of completely Bonkers theories about which kinds
of medicine could treat it. Uh There's also uh
early experiments within the next year or two that
show that the vaccines work really pretty well with
very minimal side effects. But other people started telling
stories about how they cause other problems or how
they don't really work. And so COVID-19 was just
a great case where we get terrific real information
by reliable methods at the same time as various
amounts of misinformation is being spread. So one question
is, well what are the, what are, what are
the motivations? Well, if you look at a lot
of the COVID-19 misinformation, it comes from websites where
people sell nutritional things. If they basically say, just
listen to us, we'll tell you all the things
that's wrong and they're selling pe, they're trying to
get people to buy drugs or nutritional supplements that
don't work at all. Um, SO there's a lot
of lies being told just to sell sorts of
things and some of the lies are also being
told for political purposes because people didn't want to
have the government require that people get vaccinated, they
just wanted absolute freedom. And so they would make
up stuff to, to people. So it was just
a really great study of both real information coming
by scientific means, but also misinformation coming from lies
and motivated reasoning and social media being used as
a source of information rather than good journalistic sources
or scientific journals.
So, using your framework, is it possible for us
to identify what we could have done better in
order in order to prevent the spread of misinformation
during the pandemic?
Well, it's hard to put it to work in
something quite that specific, but there's certainly lots of
more general things that needed to be done. I
mean, part of this, in the sense of preform
information has to start much earlier, critical thinking isn't
something you can just sort of pull out of
the hat when you've got a real problem. It's
something that people should be taught. I mean, I
taught at the university level but there are countries
like Finland that teach it at the high school
level. I think every high school student and possibly
even some elementary school should be taught. Here's the
difference between good ways of getting information and the
kinds of mistakes that people naturally make and ways
to correct it. So I don't see any reason
why critical thinking shouldn't be taught in the high
schools and quite pro quite possibly in the upper
levels of grade schools as, as happens in Finland.
So I think you need education going way, way
down to a lower level. So it's not just
the few university students who take courses in critical
thinking, you get exposed to this. So that's one
thing that should be there. But once you're in
the throes, then you can start to, as lots
of people have tried to make the distinction. What's
the difference between a scientific journal article and uh
a post on Twitter or X? Well, there's a
huge difference but people don't understand that. They think
that if Elon Musk post something on, well, he's,
he's pretty, he's pretty reputable. He's, he's, he's got
$200 billion he must know something. But of course,
he's just getting his views from other people on
Twitter and on, on X and so you got
to know the difference between reliable sources and not.
So that's a big part of it. Then once
you're in the throes of it, you can start
to juxtapose, hey, those people are saying things with
no evidence, with no good inferences, they're just making
it up. Uh And so that's the battle you
have to fight.
Uh So do you think that uh what we
can learn about how misinformation originated and, and spread
during the COVID-19 pandemic could serve as an illustrative
example of how medical misinformation more generally uh gets
generated and spread.
Sure. The problem is universal. Uh People take all
sorts of bogus cures. Uh They read somewhere and
they, oh that supplement works, it says and so
they, they try it. I mean, there are obviously
lots of drugs that are effective, but there are
lots of things that are just a complete waste
of time. So all across medicine, there are kinds
of treatments that are bogus. There are kinds of
drugs that don't actually work. How do we know
what's good or what's not? But the answer is
actually well established in medicine. You use clinical trials,
clinical trials are very sophisticated kinds of experiments where
if you want to know whether a drug works,
you take one group of people who get the
drug and another group of people who get something
else, a placebo, but you don't just sort of
pick them or let them choose themselves. You'd use
random assignment. You randomly divide people into two different
conditions and then if you want to do it
really carefully, you make them blind and you blind
to who's getting what. So people don't know whether
they're getting the drug or the control condition. And
then once you've done this and you've controlled for
all the different possible ways of confusion, then you
will figure out does it work or does it
not work? Well, the clinical trials have only been
around since about the 19 forties. But it's a
really solid well-established way to figure out whether a
drug actually causes people to get better. So medicine's
got this very good way of proceeding, namely controlled
clinical trials, sometimes other kinds of studies are useful
too. So we got a great way of doing
this in medicine. So that's how we do it.
What we don't do is oh, Joe took that
drug that he got off a mail order and
it made him happier. Well, that's not, that's not
science. That's not evidence. That's just an anecdote. People
often say, well, the plural of anecdote is not,
is it's not data. That data means you do
an experiment, you do a controlled experiment. So medicine
knows how to do this well, and that's how
we get our information if we're doing it right.
And unfortunately people are getting their information about measles
and vaccines and various drugs from social media or
they're getting it from websites or just trying to
sell stuff. And so it's motivated reasoning and misinformation.
So we know how to do this right? Medicine,
contemporary medicine is very sophisticated. But if we do
it wrong, then we're gonna make people less healthy
rather than more healthy, which is what medicine is
supposed to do.
Another kind of misinformation that you cover in the
book is Scientific misinformation and you go through the
example of climate change. So I I think this
is a very good example for us to understand
a little bit better. What might, what could be
the consequences of people being exposed to misinformation? So
what would you say are perhaps some of the
biggest misconceptions surrounding climate change and what are the
worst consequences we're having to deal with and we
have to deal with in the future?
Yeah, I think climate change illustrates um information, information
just as well as COVID-19 does. So is there
real information about climate change? Sure, that's what the
legions of scientists in the IPCC produced by the
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on climate change has been
doing for decades now. So we've got huge amounts
of good information. How's it done? It's done by
um measurements, it's done by observations, it's done by
instruments. So we've got huge amounts of information that's
also led to inferences. And so people have built
these climate models that allow us to make inferences
about what's likely to happen if global warming continues.
So there are these 1000 page documents produced by
the IPCC that are very closely reasoned, full of,
of empirical information that tell us what we should
expect and what we should worry about. So there
real information is, is all available, but we just
need to put it to work in making our
decisions about how to run our society. But what's
the difference? Well, on the other side, you've got
lies and huge amounts of motivated reasoning. Why is
it motivated reasoning? What's the motivation of people who
are climate change deniers? Well, it varies. A lot
of it though, comes from the oil companies, the
oil companies have been producing huge amounts of fossil
fuels. They, they get lots, they get billions of
dollars of profits out of it. They don't want
to be reined in because if there's less oil
being sold, less gasoline being used, their profits will
be hurt and so that will make their companies
less profitable for the executives, it will make their
powerless, it will make their, their salaries less. And
so you'd have the, the, these companies that would
be hurt by control on the use of fossil
fuels because obviously the, the one way to get
climate change under control is to reduce the amount
of fossil fuels that are being used. So that's
why the companies are, are biased. What about the
politicians? Well, there are a lot of politicians that
are basically in bed with the companies because that's
where they get their funding. So that's major oil
companies and the owners of the oil companies fund
politicians to say what they want. And so the
politicians will say, oh, we don't want to restrict
fossil fuels. Um, AND there's so they make up
stories about what's going on. What are the stories
that make up? Well, I say all this is
just to try to get control over people and
affect people's freedom. Well, freedom is definitely an issue
here because if you tell people no, you can't
have a gas guzzling car and, and you have
to pay taxes for on your use of carbon.
Yeah, that does limit people's freedom. I think it's
a justified one because it, it's in people's good.
But there's some politicians, the conservative politicians both tend
to be in bed with the fossil fuel companies.
But also they like the idea of freedom uh
as a sort of abstraction, irrespective of whether it's
in people's good, good or not. So you have
motivated reasoning on the side of the oil companies
and motivated reasoning on the side of some politicians
and then they're convinced that climate change isn't the
problem. And so they tell the lies and other
people believe them.
So I wanted to ask you now and I
guess that this would apply to a certain extent
to some of the misinformation going on uh in
social media and elsewhere surrounding climate change and also
anti some anti vaccine or anti-vaxxer attitudes that people
have. Uh HOW do you approach conspiracy theories through
the framework that you present in the book and
how do they relate to misinformation more generally?
OK. I mean, first of all, there are real
conspiracies. So the information part is, yes, I mean,
there actually are conspiracies in the world. I give
two examples. One is the conspiracies that the Roman
senators used to kill Julius Caesar. They got together
and said, let's kill Caesar and they did. So
that's a real conspiracy much more recently. It's well
documented now that there were conspiracies around the attempt
to have an insurrection in the United States after
the last election. The huge up uh up uh
roar that took place in the invasion of the
US Capitol. That was a conspiracy, the Oath Keepers
and the Proud Boys, they planned it and they
led a big attack that killed people and uh
and was an attempt to overthrow the government. So
that's a real conspiracy that's well documented. But what
you find a lot, especially among uh right wing
commentators is conspiracies that are just made up. Um
So I use two examples. I used the Qanon
conspiracy. There's never any evidence for that for a
real conspiracy. There's evidence we have documents that indicated
what the Proud Boys were up to. We got
emails we can know, see in fact they were
getting together to plan the interaction so we can
use observations and um and things like emails, letters
to indicate that something is a real conspiracy. But
for the fake conspiracies, there's no evidence, there's no
evidence that Q and on was any kind of
reliable source and that the things that were being
said about a supposed uh conspiracy among democratic politicians
who are pedophiles to do all sorts of horrible
things that's just all made up. And so we
can use the difference between real information and good
observations versus making stuff up to distinguish the difference
between real conspiracies and fake conspiracies. Probably the most
nasty ongoing conspiracy is called the Great Replacement theory.
It's popular in, in uh some parts of Europe
as well as in the United States. This is
the idea that there's a kind of left wing
plot to bring in nonwhite people to take over
to take over the country. Uh That's no, there's
lots of good reasons for immigration, but this is
saying, oh no, this is happening because there's because
there's just a conspiracy, but they've never been able
to document who's involved with conspiracy. How are they
talking to each other? What's the paper trail? What's
the email trail? It's just made up? Uh And
people believe it, why do they make, why do
they believe it? It's motivated reasoning. People are afraid
of immigrants, they get afraid, they think, oh we
got to do something to stop this. And so
we've got to get really good leaders, people like
uh Donald Trump or the right wing leaders in
Europe and they're the ones that will help us
because they've got to stop the Great Replacement, but
great replacement was just made up. It was a
completely fictional conspiracy. So it fits perfectly under the
account of misinformation that I gave because how is
it made up? Well, again, it's motivated reasoning. People
wanted power. People wanted to get lots of followers.
People were trying to convince people that there were
threats that weren't really there because that enabled them
to get more power. So that's really greed for
power as much as it is greed for money.
So greed fuels motivated reasoning which fuels bad communication,
which follow which fuels misinformation and that flies in
the face of real information that we can have
about real conspiracies that do sometimes occur. So the
aims theory fits just as perfectly with conspiracy theories
as it did with COVID and with um climate
change.
A and you give the example of the grid
replacement conspiracy theory there. And I guess another interesting
aspect here and please correct me if I'm wrong.
But uh I would imagine that uh one interesting
aspect of some of these conspiracy theories is that
they seem to be recurrent there is they, they
come and go, they come into fashion, they go
out of fashion because the great Replacement theory, if
I remember correctly is much older than the past.
I don't know, 1015 years, I guess it's more
than 100 years old, at least it's from the
time of eugenics in the 20th century, Nazism and
all of that.
Yeah. So it's an old one but they're even
older ones take any semi, which has been around
for at least 1000 years. The view that Jews
are in a conspiracy to take over the world,
uh, still, still very popular, uh but entirely made
up. Um So the, uh but it's been around
for, as I said, more than 1000 years.
So could you give us then an example of
political misinformation and what counts as political misinformation or
that you would classify as such?
Well, I've given some examples already such as that
the 19, the 2020 American election was stolen. Uh
So Trump is always talking about elections being stolen.
So that's one way that it could be done.
Uh But there are other things that can be
done to people that are, that are more subtle.
Uh Their lies told for example, about the economy.
So after COVID uh Western economies went through big
problems of inflation and it was really bad. Inflation
was hitting a 10% a year and that was
really causing problems because people who live uh pay
paycheck to paycheck and suddenly found their food was
costing considerably more. This was a really serious problem
for a lot of people and the politicians who
want to accuse the government of constantly being uh
irresponsible emphasize. Oh, we still got inflation. But if
you actually look at the numbers in Canada and
the United States and Europe, inflation has actually gotten
pretty much under control. It's down to maybe around
3% in most countries. And so people are still
feeling it because inflation was really great for a
few years. So it's in the interest of politicians
who want to overturn the current government to say,
oh, affordability is a huge problem. Well, it is
a problem but it's a problem that in fact
has largely been gotten under control because the inflation
rate is down to reasonable levels. So it's a
case where the extent of the affordability problem and
it's certainly the causes of it can be lied
about by politicians rather than the careful economists who
try to say. Yeah. Ok, we had had a
big problem around coming out of COVID. But now
thanks to things like tightening of money and higher
interest rates, it looks like it's pretty much under
control. So that's another case where you get political
um po political misinformation.
And in the book, you also talk about misinformation
about inequality but isn't it, isn't it uh a
sort of uh a kind of political misinformation or
not? Am I misunderstanding it here?
Oh, it, it's a lot of it has to
do with politics. It's certainly true because the governments
have to make decisions about uh fighting inequality. So
if someone says, for example, oh, we've got to
raise taxes on the rich so that we can
provide services to the poor. That's a political question.
But it's broader than that. It happens in other
areas too. Um So it happens, for example, in,
in education, uh education, these are sort of political
decisions because, but, but it, it's coming up in
a lot of different ways but just even in
ordinary life and think about uh um relationships, social
relationships, romantic relationships, uh sexist ideas uh involve all
sorts of kinds of inequality. The things that have
to take a really extreme example if someone says,
oh men should be in charge of their marriages
because they have bigger brains than women. OK. So
men should be in charge because they got bigger
brains. So they're smarter a whole layers of, of,
of misinformation there that isn't political, it has to
do with biology. Uh What's the misinformation? Well, actually,
men do have bigger brains than women, but that's
only because in women, the neurons are more densely
connected and more densely packed in. They got the
same number of neurons and by any objective measure,
they're just as smart as men. So that's one
piece of inequality. Uh SORRY, one piece of inequality
based misinformation. And it can be used to justify
uh different kinds of uh of patriarchy that men
should be running because they got better brains and
other sort of things that could go into that
of all sorts of stereotypes of women as being
inferior in other ways as being more emotional, it,
it's all made up stuff uh not based on
anything that's empirical about the brain or coming from
empirical psychology. So that's a case where interpersonal relationships
that don't necessarily involve the government can be distorted
by misinformation about inequality.
And when it comes to the Russia Ukraine, ongoing
conflict, in what ways would you say misinformation might
have played a role here? I would imagine both
in the initiation of the conflict but also uh
in driving the conflict, the conflict forward.
Well, war always involves lies. It's whoever is in
a war, they're always motivated to make things look
good for them and bad for the other. Uh
And uh Ukraine wasn't perfect about this by and
large. I think they've been accurate reporting, but there
were some stories that came out of the early
stage of, of the war that made it made
them sound really good. They had various kinds of
heroic things that supposedly happened that turned out not
to be well documented, but that, that was just
minor stuff. Whereas with Russia and the kinds of
misinformation that I mentioned earlier, things that they're claiming
that the recurring is run by Nazis or that
they've got this historical right to it. I mean,
that's much more serious and, but on the, as
things go on, they've got various uh lies about
who's winning and who's losing. So, misinformation is a
big problem in all wars. But in this case,
given it's clear that it was a, a just
war on the part of the Ukrainians defending themselves
and an unjust war on the part of the
Russians who invaded. There's really an asymmetry there. And
so the, the misinformation spread by Russia is, is
far more serious.
Uh So let me ask you one question about
these different kinds of types or domains of misinformation
that you go through in the book. So we've
covered medical scientific, political misinformation, misinformation about inequality and
specifically also the Russian Ukraine conflict. There's also social
misinformation, but we'll leave that for the uh audience
to read about it in your book. But uh
why exactly do you distinguish between these different domains
or kinds of misinformation? I mean, are they to
be understood as completely separate or how do we,
how should we think about it about
them? But the important thing from my point of
view is that they all get explained by my
theory, my aims theory with acquisition inference memory and
spread applies perfectly well to all of them. And
so it gives a unified theory for all these
different ones. And of course, there's other kinds of
misinformation as well that I did talk about. But
I think what's really cool from my point of
view is I've got a unifying theory that not
only explains how we get real information, but also
explains how misinformation arises, but also gives some hints
at what we can do to try to prevent
it and cure it. So that's what a good
theory does. How do things work when they work?
Well, how do they break and how can we
fix it? So I don't particularly care about whether
something falls under social or political or, or romantic
misinformation. The important thing is that all these really
rich aspects of human life can be explained by
a common theory of information and disinformation.
Earlier, uh you mentioned ways of uh tackling misinformation,
like for example, inoculation, pre bunking at this point
in time, what do we know about the effectiveness
of each of those uh measures, let's say uh
I mean, which one works best as far as
we know. That's
a wonderful question for which we don't really have
an answer yet. I mean, the the analogous medical
question is look, we got these different kinds of
drugs or antibiotics uh which work on works best.
So you got to do a, a complicated clinical
trial, you get a whole bunch of people, some
people get one drug other people get a different
one, different kinds of treatment. This hasn't been done.
A bunch of these things have been tested sort
of individually that is there are experiments done by
good psychologists that show, yeah, sometimes pre bunking works
and sometimes uh motivational interviewing works, sometimes critical thinking
works. But we haven't had these kinds of giant
clinical trials that would tell us when you've got
misinformation, spreading through a population of a lot of
people. Exactly which of these techniques works best under
which circumstances, it would be wonderful to have that.
But these experiments are hard to do and no
one's been able to do anything of that scale.
So I think that's a great question and I'd
love to see that kind of research being done.
But by and large, all we can do now
is trial and error and in particular situations and
see what's the thing to do. One thing I
didn't talk about as a, as a way of
operating in these situations. Sometimes none of these psychological
things are gonna work. Sometimes. Basically what you need
is political action. So if you've got Vladimir Putin
spreading lies, if you got Donald Trump spreading lies,
you're not going to convince Putin that he's wrong,
you're not gonna convince Trump that he's wrong. What
you've got to do is have political movements that
can get these people out of power in the
US. It can be done by ensuring you don't
vote for Donald Trump in the Soviet Union or
sorry, in Russia, it's much harder because he's a
dictator. That's exactly where Trump wants to be as
well. But at least if you're a democratic company
country, you can make sure you vote for leaders
who have a commitment to truth, to have a
commitment to scientific ways of collecting evidence and making
their society better on the basis of these reliable
methods rather than just relying on making stuff up
and motivated inference and communication by lies. So it
puts a big onus on, in fact, individual voters
in these situations. Unfortunately, in, in Europe and in,
in North America, we we do have the electoral
means to do this and you have to vote
the liars out of power. That's the political action
side of trying to prefer information over real information
over misinformation. So it becomes a political question, not
just a cognitive or psychological one.
And do you think that a content regulation or
moderation on social media should also be a tool
in our toolbox here?
Definitely that's really badly needed. It's very strange the
way that social media kind of grew up without
any kind of control in the US. It was
quite explicit. They passed a law that said that
the social media companies aren't responsible for the people
who post to them. Well, newspapers aren't like that
if someone says in a public newspaper, a complete
lie, well, they can be charged with libel or
slander or things like that. Anyone can say anything
they want, but there needs to be tightening up
on the social media so that people can be
held responsible for what they've said. Uh There's some
movements to try to do that, but it's really
hard because these media companies are really powerful. They're
really rich. The European Union has actually been much
better at this than North America. They brought in
various ways of trying to control social media. One
of the advances in the European Union that I'm
really impressed by is they're bringing in new rules
for controlling what happens with generative A I, which
is a huge new source of, of misinformation. It
was only uh a little bit of a problem
when I wrote that book. But now that the
book is out, it's a huge problem because it's
really easy to generate not just words but also
pictures using generative A I, it's just taken off
in the last year. So that's really dangerous. But
the European Union is thinking hard about this. Unfortunately,
they um Canada and the US are have been
much slower in the US. It's tricky because you've
got all sorts of political forces that don't want
control by government. Uh The European Union I think
is doing a really good job of, of looking
at social media and looking at generative A I
as ways of potentially being great sources of misinformation.
So politics can work. Sometimes you just have to
work with leaders and voting to get people into
place who will work for the sake of human
needs rather than for the greed of people who
are wealthy and powerful.
And when it comes to generative A I and
also now with video, audio images, deep fakes, for
example, I guess that it not only affects uh
uh social, I mean, society in general and politics
but it can also affect individual people if they
have misinformation in the form of video, audio and
so on about them over on the internet. And
that as a form of music information.
Yeah, but they, but, but really directly harmful. There's
problems in Canadian high schools where some of the
students are creating porn videos using pictures of their,
there's all these techniques that are now available that
can cause immense harm. Obviously, it's really dangerous for
political purposes too because it's very easy to create
uh pictures of people saying things that they never
said I've got all sorts of videos online. People
could produce another video with me saying the opposite
of what I actually believe. So these are new
sources of misinformation that are just getting worse and
worse as the technology gets more and more advanced.
Are there ways by which you think uh individual
people, uh I mean, something that they can do
in their daily lives in their personal lives to
try to be less susceptible to misinformation?
You know, there are a lot of things that
people can do. Some of them are more sophisticated,
like engaging in critical thinking, which requires a lot
of background. But something that I think it's just
really basic ask what is the source of that
information and what is the motivation of that source?
If you just ask that question, then you're gonna
be able to wonder. Well, is there, are they
saying it because it's true or because they're just
trying to trick me into buying some product from
them. So if, if people, instead of just automatically
getting something in social media and then passing it
on to other people, which people do all the
time, they get, they get a link. That's interesting.
I'll send it to my friends but always stop
and think, stop and think who's sending this? Is
it true? What's their motivation? If you just ask
yourself those three questions that's already going to dramatically
slow down the spread of misinformation through particular communities.
So let me just ask you one last question
then uh do you think that there are ways
by which this book connects to some of your
other work? Like for example, your book, The Cognitive
Science of Science or, or not,
you know, a lot of this comes out of
the work I've done in Philosophy of Science. So
a lot of that work I've talked about, say
the difference between good evidence and, and making stuff
up or the difference between uh evaluating theories carefully,
which is something that goes back to my phd
dissertation as opposed to just believing what you want.
And so yes, my background in philosophy of science
definitely fed into this whole account of misinformation.
So the book is again, falsehoods Fly. Why misinformation
spreads and how to stop it. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box of the
interview and doctor F just before we go apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on
the internet?
By far? The easiest is my main website is
Paul thagard.com. So there you'll find information about my
books, copies of hundreds of articles. You can also
find a link to my blog post. If you
want a sort of non technical introduction to my
work, I've got almost 100 and 70 blog posts
there that cover some of this in a really
quite non technical way that people in general can
understand. So go to Paul thr.com and that'll get
you a po a pointer to the blogs as
well.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you. Thank
you for asking great questions.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran, David Wilson, the
desario Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter Romani Charlotte Bli
Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi Nale Me, Gary
G Alman, Samo Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati
Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTW Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Lova Georgio, Theophano, Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Will Di A Costa
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, old Eon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No.
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Benedikt Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie.
Thank you for all.